<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-2-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>France. Before Angiers.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</b> and forces, drums, <abbr>etc.</abbr> on one side: on the other <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</b> and his power; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arthur</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</b> and attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Before Angiers well met, brave Austria.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arthur, that great forerunner of thy blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Richard, that robb’d the lion of his heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fought the holy wars in Palestine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By this brave duke came early to his grave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for amends to his posterity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At our importance hither is he come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To spread his colours, boy, in thy behalf,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to rebuke the usurpation</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of thy unnatural uncle, English John:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arthur</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>God shall forgive you Coeur-de-lion’s death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The rather that you give his offspring life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shadowing their right under your wings of war:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I give you welcome with a powerless hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But with a heart full of unstained love:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Welcome before the gates of Angiers, duke.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td>A noble boy! Who would not do thee right?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As seal to this indenture of my love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That to my home I will no more return,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till Angiers and the right thou hast in France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Together with that pale, that white-faced shore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose foot spurns back the ocean’s roaring tides</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And coops from other lands her islanders,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even till that England, hedged in with the main,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That water-walled bulwark, still secure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And confident from foreign purposes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even till that utmost corner of the west</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Salute thee for her king: till then, fair boy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will I not think of home, but follow arms.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, take his mother’s thanks, a widow’s thanks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make a more requital to your love!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In such a just and charitable war.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well then, to work: our cannon shall be bent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the brows of this resisting town.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Call for our chiefest men of discipline,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cull the plots of best advantages:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll lay before this town our royal bones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wade to the market-place in Frenchmen’s blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But we will make it subject to this boy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stay for an answer to your embassy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest unadvised you stain your swords with blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Lord Chatillon may from England bring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That right in peace which here we urge in war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then we shall repent each drop of blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chatillon</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A wonder, lady! lo, upon thy wish,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our messenger Chatillon is arrived!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What England says, say briefly, gentle lord;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We coldly pause for thee; Chatillon, speak.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chatillon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then turn your forces from this paltry siege</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stir them up against a mightier task.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>England, impatient of your just demands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath put himself in arms: the adverse winds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose leisure I have stay’d, have given him time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To land his legions all as soon as I;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His marches are expedient to this town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His forces strong, his soldiers confident.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With him along is come the mother-queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An Ate, stirring him to blood and strife;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With her her niece, the Lady Blanch of Spain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With them a bastard of the king’s deceased,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the unsettled humours of the land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With ladies’ faces and fierce dragons’ spleens,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make hazard of new fortunes here:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than now the English bottoms have waft o’er</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did nearer float upon the swelling tide,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do offence and scath in Christendom. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drum beats.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>The interruption of their churlish drums</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cuts off more circumstance: they are at hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To parley or to fight; therefore prepare.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>How much unlook’d for is this expedition!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By how much unexpected, by so much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We must awake endavour for defence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For courage mounteth with occasion:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let them be welcome then: we are prepared.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Elinor</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Blanch</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</b>, Lords, and forces.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace be to France, if France in peace permit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our just and lineal entrance to our own;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whiles we, God’s wrathful agent, do correct</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their proud contempt that beats His peace to heaven.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace be to England, if that war return</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From France to England, there to live in peace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>England we love; and for that England’s sake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With burden of our armour here we sweat.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This toil of ours should be a work of thine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou from loving England art so far,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou hast under-wrought his lawful king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cut off the sequence of posterity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out-faced infant state and done a rape</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look here upon thy brother Geffrey’s face;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This little abstract doth contain that large</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which died in Geffrey, and the hand of time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Geffrey was thy elder brother born,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this his son; England was Geffrey’s right</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this is Geffrey’s: in the name of God</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How comes it then that thou art call’d a king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When living blood doth in these temples beat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which owe the crown that thou o’ermasterest?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>From whom hast thou this great commission, France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To draw my answer from thy articles?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>From that supernal judge, that stirs good thoughts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In any breast of strong authority,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To look into the blots and stains of right:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That judge hath made me guardian to this boy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by whose help I mean to chastise it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>Alack, thou dost usurp authority.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>Excuse; it is to beat usurping down.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elinor</td>
							<td>Who is it thou dost call usurper, France?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</td>
							<td>Let me make answer; thy usurping son.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elinor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Out, insolent! thy bastard shall be king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou mayst be a queen, and cheque the world!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My bed was ever to thy son as true</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thine was to thy husband; and this boy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Liker in feature to his father Geffrey</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than thou and John in manners; being as like</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As rain to water, or devil to his dam.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My boy a bastard! By my soul, I think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His father never was so true begot:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elinor</td>
							<td>There’s a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</td>
							<td>There’s a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</td>
							<td>Peace!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>Hear the crier.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</td>
							<td>What the devil art thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>One that will play the devil, sir, with you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An a’ may catch your hide and you alone:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are the hare of whom the proverb goes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose valour plucks dead lions by the beard;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll smoke your skin-coat, an I catch you right;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sirrah, look to’t; i’ faith, I will, i’ faith.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Blanch</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, well did he become that lion’s robe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That did disrobe the lion of that robe!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It lies as sightly on the back of him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As great Alcides’ shows upon an ass:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, ass, I’ll take that burthen from your back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What craker is this same that deafs our ears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With this abundance of superfluous breath?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>Lewis, determine what we shall do straight.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Women and fools, break off your conference.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King John, this is the very sum of all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>England and Ireland, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In right of Arthur do I claim of thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My life as soon: I do defy thee, France.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arthur of Bretagne, yield thee to my hand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And out of my dear love I’ll give thee more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than e’er the coward hand of France can win:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Submit thee, boy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elinor</td>
							<td>Come to thy grandam, child.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do, child, go to it grandam, child:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s a good grandam.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arthur</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good my mother, peace!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would that I were low laid in my grave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not worth this coil that’s made for me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elinor</td>
							<td>His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now shame upon you, whether she does or no!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His grandam’s wrongs, and not his mother’s shames,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be bribed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do him justice and revenge on you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elinor</td>
							<td>Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Call not me slanderer; thou and thine usurp</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The dominations, royalties and rights</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of this oppressed boy: this is thy eld’st son’s son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Infortunate in nothing but in thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy sins are visited in this poor child;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The canon of the law is laid on him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being but the second generation</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>Bedlam, have done.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have but this to say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he is not only plagued for her sin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But God hath made her sin and her the plague</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On this removed issue, plague for her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with her plague; her sin his injury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her injury the beadle to her sin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All punish’d in the person of this child,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all for her; a plague upon her!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elinor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou unadvised scold, I can produce</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A will that bars the title of thy son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Constance</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, who doubts that? a will! a wicked will:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A woman’s will; a canker’d grandam’s will!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace, lady! pause, or be more temperate:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It ill beseems this presence to cry aim</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To these ill-tuned repetitions.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some trumpet summon hither to the walls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These men of Angiers: let us hear them speak</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose title they admit, Arthur’s or John’s. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpet sounds. Enter certain <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</b> upon the walls.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td>Who is it that hath warn’d us to the walls?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>’Tis France, for England.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>England, for itself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You loving men of Angiers, Arthur’s subjects,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our trumpet call’d you to this gentle parle⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For our advantage; therefore hear us first.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These flags of France, that are advanced here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the eye and prospect of your town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have hither march’d to your endamagement:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cannons have their bowels full of wrath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ready mounted are they to spit forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their iron indignation ’gainst your walls:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All preparation for a bloody siege</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All merciless proceeding by these French</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confronts your city’s eyes, your winking gates;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And but for our approach those sleeping stones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That as a waist doth girdle you about,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the compulsion of their ordinance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By this time from their fixed beds of lime</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had been dishabited, and wide havoc made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For bloody power to rush upon your peace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But on the sight of us your lawful king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who painfully with much expedient march</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have brought a countercheque before your gates,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To save unscratch’d your city’s threatened cheeks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behold, the French amazed vouchsafe a parle;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now, instead of bullets wrapp’d in fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make a shaking fever in your walls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They shoot but calm words folded up in smoke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make a faithless error in your ears:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which trust accordingly, kind citizens,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let us in, your king, whose labour’d spirits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forwearied in this action of swift speed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Crave harbourage within your city walls.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>When I have said, make answer to us both.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, in this right hand, whose protection</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is most divinely vow’d upon the right</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of him it holds, stands young Plantagenet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Son to the elder brother of this man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And king o’er him and all that he enjoys:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For this down-trodden equity, we tread</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In warlike march these greens before your town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being no further enemy to you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than the constraint of hospitable zeal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the relief of this oppressed child</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Religiously provokes. Be pleased then</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To pay that duty which you truly owe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To that owes it, namely this young prince:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save in aspect, hath all offence seal’d up;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our cannons’ malice vainly shall be spent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the invulnerable clouds of heaven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with a blessed and unvex’d retire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With unhack’d swords and helmets all unbruised,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We will bear home that lusty blood again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which here we came to spout against your town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And leave your children, wives and you in peace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if you fondly pass our proffer’d offer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis not the roundure of your old-faced walls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can hide you from our messengers of war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though all these English and their discipline</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were harbour’d in their rude circumference.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then tell us, shall your city call us lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In that behalf which we have challenged it?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or shall we give the signal to our rage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stalk in blood to our possession?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In brief, we are the king of England’s subjects:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For him, and in his right, we hold this town.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>Acknowledge then the king, and let me in.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That can we not; but he that proves the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him will we prove loyal: till that time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have we ramm’d up our gates against the world.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Doth not the crown of England prove the king?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if not that, I bring you witnesses,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England’s breed⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>Bastards, and else.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>To verify our title with their lives.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>As many and as well-born bloods as those⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>Some bastards too.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>Stand in his face to contradict his claim.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Till you compound whose right is worthiest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We for the worthiest hold the right from both.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then God forgive the sin of all those souls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That to their everlasting residence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the dew of evening fall, shall fleet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In dreadful trial of our kingdom’s king!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>Amen, amen! Mount, chevaliers! to arms!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Saint George, that swinged the dragon, and e’er since</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sits on his horseback at mine hostess’ door,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Teach us some fence! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</b>.</i> Sirrah, were I at home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At your den, sirrah, with your lioness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would set an ox-head to your lion’s hide,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make a monster of you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</td>
							<td>Peace! no more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>O tremble, for you hear the lion roar.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Up higher to the plain; where we’ll set forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In best appointment all our regiments.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>Speed then, to take advantage of the field.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It shall be so; and at the other hill</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Command the rest to stand. God and our right! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Here after excursions, enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald of France</b>, with trumpets, to the gates.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">French Herald</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You men of Angiers, open wide your gates,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let young Arthur, Duke of Bretagne, in,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who by the hand of France this day hath made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Much work for tears in many an English mother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Many a widow’s husband grovelling lies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Coldly embracing the discolour’d earth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And victory, with little loss, doth play</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the dancing banners of the French,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who are at hand, triumphantly display’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To enter conquerors and to proclaim</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arthur of Bretagne England’s king and yours.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">English Herald</b>, with trumpet.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">English Herald</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rejoice, you men of Angiers, ring your bells:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King John, your king and England’s doth approach,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commander of this hot malicious day:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their armours, that march’d hence so silver-bright,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hither return all gilt with Frenchmen’s blood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There stuck no plume in any English crest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is removed by a staff of France;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our colours do return in those same hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That did display them when we first march’d forth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, like a troop of jolly huntsmen, come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our lusty English, all with purpled hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dyed in the dying slaughter of their foes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Open your gates and gives the victors way.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Heralds, from off our towers we might behold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From first to last, the onset and retire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of both your armies; whose equality</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By our best eyes cannot be censured:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blood hath bought blood and blows have answered blows;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strength match’d with strength, and power confronted power:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both are alike; and both alike we like.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One must prove greatest: while they weigh so even,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We hold our town for neither, yet for both.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</b>, with their powers, severally.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>France, hast thou yet more blood to cast away?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say, shall the current of our right run on?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose passage, vex’d with thy impediment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall leave his native channel and o’erswell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With course disturb’d even thy confining shores,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless thou let his silver water keep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A peaceful progress to the ocean.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>England, thou hast not saved one drop of blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this hot trial, more than we of France;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rather, lost more. And by this hand I swear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sways the earth this climate overlooks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before we will lay down our just-borne arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll put thee down, ’gainst whom these arms we bear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or add a royal number to the dead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gracing the scroll that tells of this war’s loss</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ha, majesty! how high thy glory towers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When the rich blood of kings is set on fire!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, now doth Death line his dead chaps with steel;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In undetermined differences of kings.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cry, “havoc!” kings; back to the stained field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You equal potents, fiery kindled spirits!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then let confusion of one part confirm</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other’s peace: till then, blows, blood and death!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>Whose party do the townsmen yet admit?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>Speak, citizens, for England; who’s your king?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td>The king of England; when we know the king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>Know him in us, that here hold up his right.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In us, that are our own great deputy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bear possession of our person here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A greater power then we denies all this;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And till it be undoubted, we do lock</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our former scruple in our strong-barr’d gates;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King’d of our fears, until our fears, resolved,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be by some certain king purged and deposed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stand securely on their battlements,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As in a theatre, whence they gape and point</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At your industrious scenes and acts of death.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your royal presences be ruled by me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do like the mutines of Jerusalem,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be friends awhile and both conjointly bend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your sharpest deeds of malice on this town:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By east and west let France and England mount</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their battering cannon charged to the mouths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till their soul-fearing clamours have brawl’d down</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ld play incessantly upon these jades,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even till unfenced desolation</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leave them as naked as the vulgar air.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That done, dissever your united strengths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And part your mingled colours once again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn face to face and bloody point to point;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, in a moment, Fortune shall cull forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of one side her happy minion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whom in favour she shall give the day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And kiss him with a glorious victory.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How like you this wild counsel, mighty states?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Smacks it not something of the policy?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, by the sky that hangs above our heads,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I like it well. France, shall we knit our powers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lay this Angiers even to the ground;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then after fight who shall be king of it?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>An if thou hast the mettle of a king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being wronged as we are by this peevish town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As we will ours, against these saucy walls;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when that we have dash’d them to the ground,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why then defy each other and pell-mell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make work upon ourselves, for heaven or hell.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>Let it be so. Say, where will you assault?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We from the west will send destruction</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into this city’s bosom.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</td>
							<td>I from the north.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Our thunder from the south</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O prudent discipline! From north to south:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Austria and France shoot in each other’s mouth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll stir them to it. Come, away, away!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hear us, great kings: vouchsafe awhile to stay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I shall show you peace and fair-faced league;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Win you this city without stroke or wound;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rescue those breathing lives to die in beds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That here come sacrifices for the field:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Persever not, but hear me, mighty kings.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>Speak on with favour; we are bent to hear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is niece to England: look upon the years</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Lewis the Dauphin and that lovely maid:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where should he find it fairer than in Blanch?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If zealous love should go in search of virtue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where should he find it purer than in Blanch?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If love ambitious sought a match of birth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanch?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is the young Dauphin every way complete:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not complete of, say he is not she;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she again wants nothing, to name want,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If want it be not that she is not he:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is the half part of a blessed man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Left to be finished by such as she;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she a fair divided excellence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose fulness of perfection lies in him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, two such silver currents, when they join,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do glorify the banks that bound them in;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And two such shores to two such streams made one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To these two princes, if you marry them.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This union shall do more than battery can</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To our fast-closed gates; for at this match,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With swifter spleen than powder can enforce,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give you entrance: but without this match,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sea enraged is not half so deaf,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lions more confident, mountains and rocks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More free from motion, no, not Death himself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In moral fury half so peremptory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As we to keep this city.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here’s a stay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of his rags! Here’s a large mouth, indeed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That spits forth death and mountains, rocks and seas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Talks as familiarly of roaring lions</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What cannoneer begot this lusty blood?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He speaks plain cannon fire, and smoke and bounce;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He gives the bastinado with his tongue:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our ears are cudgell’d; not a word of his</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But buffets better than a fist of France:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Zounds! I was never so bethump’d with words</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since I first call’d my brother’s father dad.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elinor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Son, list to this conjunction, make this match;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give with our niece a dowry large enough:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For by this knot thou shalt so surely tie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy now unsured assurance to the crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see a yielding in the looks of France;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mark, how they whisper: urge them while their souls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are capable of this ambition,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of soft petitions, pity and remorse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cool and congeal again to what it was.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why answer not the double majesties</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This friendly treaty of our threaten’d town?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Speak England first, that hath been forward first</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To speak unto this city: what say you?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If that the Dauphin there, thy princely son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can in this book of beauty read “I love,”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her dowry shall weigh equal with a queen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Anjou and fair Touraine, Maine, Poictiers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all that we upon this side the sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Except this city now by us besieged,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Find liable to our crown and dignity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall gild her bridal bed and make her rich</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In titles, honours and promotions,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As she in beauty, education, blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Holds hand with any princess of the world.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>What say’st thou, boy? look in the lady’s face.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do, my lord; and in her eye I find</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A wonder, or a wondrous miracle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The shadow of myself form’d in her eye:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which being but the shadow of your son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Becomes a sun and makes your son a shadow:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do protest I never loved myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till now infixed I beheld myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Drawn in the flattering table of her eye. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Whispers with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Blanch</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Drawn in the flattering table of her eye!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hang’d in the frowning wrinkle of her brow!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And quarter’d in her heart! he doth espy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Himself love’s traitor: this is pity now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hang’d and drawn and quartered, there should be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In such a love so vile a lout as he.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Blanch</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My uncle’s will in this respect is mine:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he see aught in you that makes him like,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That any thing he sees, which moves his liking,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I can with ease translate it to my will;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or if you will, to speak more properly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will enforce it easily to my love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Further I will not flatter you, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That all I see in you is worthy love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than this; that nothing do I see in you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your judge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I can find should merit any hate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>What say these young ones? What say you my niece?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Blanch</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That she is bound in honour still to do</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>Speak then, prince Dauphin; can you love this lady?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I do love her most unfeignedly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then do I give Volquessen, Touraine, Maine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Poictiers and Anjou, these five provinces,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With her to thee; and this addition more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full thirty thousand marks of English coin.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Philip of France, if thou be pleased withal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Command thy son and daughter to join hands.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td>It likes us well; young princes, close your hands.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Austria</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And your lips too; for I am well assured</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I did so when I was first assured.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let in that amity which you have made;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For at Saint Mary’s chapel presently</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The rites of marriage shall be solemnized.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not the Lady Constance in this troop?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know she is not, for this match made up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her presence would have interrupted much:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is she and her son? tell me, who knows.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td>She is sad and passionate at your highness’ tent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And, by my faith, this league that we have made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will give her sadness very little cure.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brother of England, how may we content</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This widow lady? In her right we came;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which we, God knows, have turn’d another way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To our own vantage.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We will heal up all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For we’ll create young Arthur Duke of Bretagne</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Earl of Richmond; and this rich fair town</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We make him lord of. Call the Lady Constance;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some speedy messenger bid her repair</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To our solemnity: I trust we shall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not fill up the measure of her will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet in some measure satisfy her so</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we shall stop her exclamation.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go we, as well as haste will suffer us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To this unlook’d for, unprepared pomp. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all but the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mad world! mad kings! mad composition!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>John, to stop Arthur’s title in the whole,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath willingly departed with a part,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And France, whose armour conscience buckled on,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom zeal and charity brought to the field</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As God’s own soldier, rounded in the ear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With that same purpose-changer, that sly devil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That broker, that still breaks the pate of faith,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That daily break-vow, he that wins of all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, having no external thing to lose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But the word “maid,” cheats the poor maid of that,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That smooth-faced gentleman, tickling Commodity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commodity, the bias of the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The world, who of itself is peised well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made to run even upon even ground,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This sway of motion, this Commodity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes it take head from all indifferency,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From all direction, purpose, course, intent:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this same bias, this Commodity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clapp’d on the outward eye of fickle France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath drawn him from his own determined aid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From a resolved and honourable war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To a most base and vile-concluded peace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And why rail I on this Commodity?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But for because he hath not woo’d me yet:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not that I have the power to clutch my hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When his fair angels would salute my palm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But for my hand, as unattempted yet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a poor beggar, raileth on the rich.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And say there is no sin but to be rich;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And being rich, my virtue then shall be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To say there is no vice but beggary.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since kings break faith upon commodity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
