<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-5-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John’s</b> palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pandulph</b>, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thus have I yielded up into your hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The circle of my glory. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Giving the crown.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pandulph</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Take again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From this my hand, as holding of the pope</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your sovereign greatness and authority.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now keep your holy word: go meet the French,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from his holiness use all your power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stop their marches ’fore we are inflamed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our discontented counties do revolt;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our people quarrel with obedience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swearing allegiance and the love of soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stranger blood, to foreign royalty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This inundation of mistemper’d humour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rests by you only to be qualified:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then pause not; for the present time’s so sick,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That present medicine must be minister’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or overthrow incurable ensues.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pandulph</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It was my breath that blew this tempest up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon your stubborn usage of the pope;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But since you are a gentle convertite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tongue shall hush again this storm of war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make fair weather in your blustering land.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On this Ascension-day, remember well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon your oath of service to the pope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go I to make the French lay down their arms. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is this Ascension-day? Did not the prophet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say that before Ascension-day at noon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My crown I should give off? Even so I have:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I did suppose it should be on constraint;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, heaven be thank’d, it is but voluntary.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All Kent hath yielded; nothing there holds out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Dover castle: London hath received,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your nobles will not hear you, but are gone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To offer service to your enemy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wild amazement hurries up and down</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The little number of your doubtful friends.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Would not my lords return to me again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After they heard young Arthur was alive?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They found him dead and cast into the streets,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An empty casket, where the jewel of life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By some damn’d hand was robb’d and ta’en away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>That villain Hubert told me he did live.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So, on my soul, he did, for aught he knew.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But wherefore do you droop? why look you sad?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be great in act, as you have been in thought;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let not the world see fear and sad distrust</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Govern the motion of a kingly eye:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be stirring as the time; be fire with fire;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Threaten the threatener and outface the brow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of bragging horror: so shall inferior eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That borrow their behaviours from the great,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grow great by your example and put on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The dauntless spirit of resolution.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away, and glister like the god of war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he intendeth to become the field:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Show boldness and aspiring confidence.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, shall they seek the lion in his den,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fright him there? and make him tremble there?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, let it not be said: forage, and run</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To meet displeasure farther from the doors,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And grapple with him ere he comes so nigh.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The legate of the pope hath been with me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I have made a happy peace with him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he hath promised to dismiss the powers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Led by the Dauphin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O inglorious league!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall we, upon the footing of our land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Send fair-play orders and make compromise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Insinuation, parley and base truce</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To arms invasive? shall a beardless boy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A cocker’d silken wanton, brave our fields,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And flesh his spirit in a warlike soil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mocking the air with colours idly spread,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And find no check? Let us, my liege, to arms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perchance the cardinal cannot make your peace;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or if he do, let it at least be said</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They saw we had a purpose of defence.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>Have thou the ordering of this present time.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Away, then, with good courage! yet, I know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our party may well meet a prouder foe. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dauphin’s</b> camp at <abbr>St.</abbr> Edmundsbury.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter, in arms, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Melun</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bigot</b>, and Soldiers.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord Melun, let this be copied out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And keep it safe for our remembrance:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Return the precedent to these lords again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, having our fair order written down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both they and we, perusing o’er these notes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May know wherefore we took the sacrament</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And keep our faiths firm and inviolable.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Upon our sides it never shall be broken.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, noble Dauphin, albeit we swear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A voluntary zeal and an unurged faith</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To your proceedings; yet believe me, prince,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not glad that such a sore of time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should seek a plaster by contemn’d revolt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And heal the inveterate canker of one wound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By making many. O, it grieves my soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I must draw this metal from my side</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be a widow-maker! O, and there</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where honourable rescue and defence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cries out upon the name of Salisbury!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But such is the infection of the time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, for the health and physic of our right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We cannot deal but with the very hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of stern injustice and confused wrong.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And is’t not pity, O my grieved friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we, the sons and children of this isle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were born to see so sad an hour as this;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherein we step after a stranger march</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her enemies’ ranks⁠—I must withdraw and weep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the spot of this enforced cause⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To grace the gentry of a land remote,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And follow unacquainted colours here?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, here? O nation, that thou couldst remove!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Neptune’s arms, who clippeth thee about,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And grapple thee unto a pagan shore;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where these two Christian armies might combine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The blood of malice in a vein of league,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not to spend it so unneighbourly!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A noble temper dost thou show in this;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And great affections wrestling in thy bosom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth make an earthquake of nobility.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, what a noble combat hast thou fought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Between compulsion and a brave respect!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me wipe off this honourable dew,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart hath melted at a lady’s tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being an ordinary inundation;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But this effusion of such manly drops,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This shower, blown up by tempest of the soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Startles mine eyes, and makes me more amazed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Figured quite o’er with burning meteors.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lift up thy brow, renowned Salisbury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with a great heart heave away the storm:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend these waters to those baby eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That never saw the giant world enraged;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor met with fortune other than at feasts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full of warm blood, of mirth, of gossiping.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, come; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into the purse of rich prosperity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As Lewis himself: so, nobles, shall you all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And even there, methinks, an angel spake:</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pandulph</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Look, where the holy legate comes apace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give us warrant from the hand of heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on our actions set the name of right</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With holy breath.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pandulph</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hail, noble prince of France!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The next is this, King John hath reconciled</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Himself to Rome; his spirit is come in,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That so stood out against the holy church,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The great metropolis and see of Rome:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore thy threatening colours now wind up;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tame the savage spirit of wild war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, like a lion foster’d up at hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It may lie gently at the foot of peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And be no further harmful than in show.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your grace shall pardon me, I will not back:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am too high-born to be propertied,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be a secondary at control,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or useful serving-man and instrument,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To any sovereign state throughout the world.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Between this chastised kingdom and myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And brought in matter that should feed this fire;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now ’tis far too huge to be blown out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With that same weak wind which enkindled it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You taught me how to know the face of right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Acquainted me with interest to this land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And come ye now to tell me John hath made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His peace with Rome? What is that peace to me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, by the honour of my marriage-bed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After young Arthur, claim this land for mine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, now it is half-conquer’d, must I back</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because that John hath made his peace with Rome?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am I Rome’s slave? What penny hath Rome borne,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What men provided, what munition sent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To underprop this action? Is’t not I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That undergo this charge? who else but I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And such as to my claim are liable,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweat in this business and maintain this war?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I not heard these islanders shout out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Vive le roi!” as I have bank’d their towns?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I not here the best cards for the game,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To win this easy match play’d for a crown?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shall I now give o’er the yielded set?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pandulph</td>
							<td>You look but on the outside of this work.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Outside or inside, I will not return</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till my attempt so much be glorified</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As to my ample hope was promised</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before I drew this gallant head of war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cull’d these fiery spirits from the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To outlook conquest and to win renown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in the jaws of danger and of death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpet sounds.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</b>, attended.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>According to the fair play of the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me have audience; I am sent to speak:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My holy lord of Milan, from the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come, to learn how you have dealt for him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as you answer, I do know the scope</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And warrant limited unto my tongue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pandulph</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The Dauphin is too wilful-opposite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will not temporize with my entreaties;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He flatly says he’ll not lay down his arms.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By all the blood that ever fury breathed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The youth says well. Now hear our English king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thus his royalty doth speak in me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is prepared, and reason too he should:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This apish and unmannerly approach,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This harness’d masque and unadvised revel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This unhair’d sauciness and boyish troops,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king doth smile at; and is well prepared</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whip this dwarfish war, these pygmy arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From out the circle of his territories.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hand which had the strength, even at your door,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cudgel you and make you take the hatch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dive like buckets in concealed wells,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To crouch in litter of your stable planks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To lie like pawns lock’d up in chests and trunks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hug with swine, to seek sweet safety out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even at the crying of your nation’s crow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thinking his voice an armed Englishman;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall that victorious hand be feebled here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in your chambers gave you chastisement?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No: know the gallant monarch is in arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And like an eagle o’er his aery towers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To souse annoyance that comes near his nest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you degenerate, you ingrate revolts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You bloody Neroes, ripping up the womb</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of your dear mother England, blush for shame;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For your own ladies and pale-visaged maids</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like Amazons come tripping after drums,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their thimbles into armed gauntlets change,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their needles to lances, and their gentle hearts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fierce and bloody inclination.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We grant thou canst outscold us: fare thee well;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We hold our time too precious to be spent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With such a brabbler.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pandulph</td>
							<td>Give me leave to speak.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>No, I will speak.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We will attend to neither.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strike up the drums; and let the tongue of war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Plead for our interest and our being here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Indeed your drums, being beaten, will cry out;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so shall you, being beaten: do but start</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An echo with the clamour of thy drum,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And even at hand a drum is ready braced</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That shall reverberate all as loud as thine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sound but another, and another shall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As loud as thine rattle the welkin’s ear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mock the deep-mouth’d thunder: for at hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not trusting to this halting legate here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom he hath used rather for sport than need,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is warlike John; and in his forehead sits</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A bare-ribb’d death, whose office is this day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To feast upon whole thousands of the French.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td>Strike up our drums, to find this danger out.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>And thou shalt find it, Dauphin, do not doubt. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The field of battle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarums. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td>Badly, I fear. How fares your majesty?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This fever, that hath troubled me so long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lies heavy on me; O, my heart is sick!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, your valiant kinsman, Faulconbridge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Desires your majesty to leave the field</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And send him word by me which way you go.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td>Tell him, toward Swinstead, to the abbey there.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be of good comfort; for the great supply</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That was expected by the Dauphin here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are wreck’d three nights ago on Goodwin Sands.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This news was brought to Richard but even now:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay me! this tyrant fever burns me up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will not let me welcome this good news.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set on toward Swinstead: to my litter straight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the field.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bigot</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td>I did not think the king so stored with friends.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Up once again; put spirit in the French:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If they miscarry, we miscarry too.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That misbegotten devil, Faulconbridge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td>They say King John sore sick hath left the field.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Melun</b>, wounded.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Melun</td>
							<td>Lead me to the revolts of England here.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td>When we were happy we had other names.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td>It is the Count Melun.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td>Wounded to death.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Melun</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fly, noble English, you are bought and sold;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unthread the rude eye of rebellion</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And welcome home again discarded faith.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seek out King John and fall before his feet;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For if the French be lords of this loud day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He means to recompense the pains you take</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By cutting off your heads: thus hath he sworn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I with him, and many moe with me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even on that altar where we swore to you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dear amity and everlasting love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td>May this be possible? may this be true?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Melun</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Have I not hideous death within my view,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Retaining but a quantity of life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which bleeds away, even as a form of wax</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Resolveth from his figure ’gainst the fire?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What in the world should make me now deceive,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since I must lose the use of all deceit?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why should I then be false, since it is true</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I must die here and live hence by truth?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I say again, if Lewis do win the day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is forsworn, if e’er those eyes of yours</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Behold another day break in the east:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But even this night, whose black contagious breath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Already smokes about the burning crest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the old, feeble and day-wearied sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even this ill night, your breathing shall expire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Paying the fine of rated treachery</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If Lewis by your assistance win the day.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend me to one Hubert with your king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The love of him, and this respect besides,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that my grandsire was an Englishman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Awakes my conscience to confess all this.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In lieu whereof, I pray you, bear me hence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From forth the noise and rumour of the field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In peace, and part this body and my soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With contemplation and devout desires.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We do believe thee: and beshrew my soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I do love the favour and the form</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of this most fair occasion, by the which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We will untread the steps of damned flight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And like a bated and retired flood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leaving our rankness and irregular course,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stoop low within those bounds we have o’erlook’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cabby run on in obedience</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even to our ocean, to our great King John.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I do see the cruel pangs of death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Right in thine eye. Away, my friends! New flight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And happy newness, that intends old right. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt, leading off <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Melun</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The French camp.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</b> and his train.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The sun of heaven methought was loath to set,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But stay’d and made the western welkin blush,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When English measure backward their own ground</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In faint retire. O, bravely came we off,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When with a volley of our needless shot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After such bloody toil, we bid good night;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wound our tattering colours clearly up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Last in the field, and almost lords of it!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td>Where is my prince, the Dauphin?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td>Here: what news?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The Count Melun is slain; the English lords</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By his persuasion are again fall’n off,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And your supply, which you have wish’d so long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are cast away and sunk on Goodwin Sands.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, foul shrewd news! beshrew thy very heart!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I did not think to be so sad to-night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As this hath made me. Who was he that said</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King John did fly an hour or two before</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The stumbling night did part our weary powers?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td>Whoever spoke it, it is true, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lewis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well; keep good quarter and good care to-night:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The day shall not be up so soon as I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To try the fair adventure of to-morrow. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-6" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h3>
				<p>An open place in the neighbourhood of Swinstead Abbey.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</b>, severally.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td>Who’s there? speak, ho! speak quickly, or I shoot.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>A friend. What art thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td>Of the part of England.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>Whither dost thou go?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What’s that to thee? why may not I demand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of thine affairs, as well as thou of mine?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>Hubert, I think?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou hast a perfect thought:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will upon all hazards well believe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art my friend, that know’st my tongue so well.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who art thou?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who thou wilt: and if thou please,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou mayst befriend me so much as to think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come one way of the Plantagenets.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Unkind remembrance! thou and eyeless night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have done me shame: brave soldier, pardon me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That any accent breaking from thy tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should ’scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>Come, come; sans compliment, what news abroad?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, here walk I in the black brow of night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To find you out.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>Brief, then; and what’s the news?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, my sweet sir, news fitting to the night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Black, fearful, comfortless and horrible.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Show me the very wound of this ill news:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am no woman, I’ll not swoon at it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The king, I fear, is poison’d by a monk:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I left him almost speechless; and broke out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To acquaint you with this evil, that you might</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The better arm you to the sudden time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than if you had at leisure known of this.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>How did he take it? who did taste to him?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A monk, I tell you; a resolved villain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose bowels suddenly burst out: the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet speaks and peradventure may recover.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td>Who didst thou leave to tend his majesty?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hubert</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, know you not? the lords are all come back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And brought Prince Henry in their company;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At whose request the king hath pardon’d them,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they are all about his majesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Withhold thine indignation, mighty heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tempt us not to bear above our power!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll tell tree, Hubert, half my power this night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Passing these flats, are taken by the tide;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These Lincoln Washes have devoured them;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself, well mounted, hardly have escaped.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away before: conduct me to the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I doubt he will be dead or ere I come. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-7" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The orchard in Swinstead Abbey.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Henry</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bigot</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Henry</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is too late: the life of all his blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is touch’d corruptibly, and his pure brain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which some suppose the soul’s frail dwelling-house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth by the idle comments that it makes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Foretell the ending of mortality.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>His highness yet doth speak, and holds belief</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, being brought into the open air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It would allay the burning quality</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of that fell poison which assaileth him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Henry</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let him be brought into the orchard here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth he still rage? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bigot</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He is more patient</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than when you left him; even now he sung.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Henry</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O vanity of sickness! fierce extremes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In their continuance will not feel themselves.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Death, having prey’d upon the outward parts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leaves them invisible, and his siege is now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the mind, the which he pricks and wounds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With many legions of strange fantasies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, in their throng and press to that last hold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confound themselves. ’Tis strange that death should sing.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His soul and body to their lasting rest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be of good comfort, prince; for you are born</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To set a form upon that indigest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which he hath left so shapeless and so rude.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Attendants, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bigot</b>, carrying <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b> in a chair.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It would not out at windows nor at doors.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is so hot a summer in my bosom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That all my bowels crumble up to dust:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am a scribbled form, drawn with a pen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon a parchment, and against this fire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do I shrink up.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Henry</td>
							<td>How fares your majesty?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Poison’d⁠—ill fare⁠—dead, forsook, cast off:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And none of you will bid the winter come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To thrust his icy fingers in my maw,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor let my kingdom’s rivers take their course</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through my burn’d bosom, nor entreat the north</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I beg cold comfort; and you are so strait</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so ingrateful, you deny me that.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Henry</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O that there were some virtue in my tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That might relieve you!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The salt in them is hot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within me is a hell; and there the poison</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is as a fiend confined to tyrannize</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On unreprievable condemned blood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, I am scalded with my violent motion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And spleen of speed to see your majesty!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O cousin, thou art come to set mine eye:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tackle of my heart is crack’d and burn’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are turned to one thread, one little hair:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart hath one poor string to stay it by,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which holds but till thy news be uttered;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then all this thou seest is but a clod</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And module of confounded royalty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The Dauphin is preparing hitherward,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where heaven He knows how we shall answer him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For in a night the best part of my power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I upon advantage did remove,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were in the Washes all unwarily</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Devoured by the unexpected flood. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King</b> dies.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My liege! my lord! but now a king, now thus.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Henry</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Even so must I run on, and even so stop.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When this was now a king, and now is clay?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do the office for thee of revenge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As it on earth hath been thy servant still.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, now, you stars that move in your right spheres,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where be your powers? show now your mended faiths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And instantly return with me again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To push destruction and perpetual shame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of the weak door of our fainting land.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Dauphin rages at our very heels.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It seems you know not, then, so much as we:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who half an hour since came from the Dauphin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And brings from him such offers of our peace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As we with honour and respect may take,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With purpose presently to leave this war.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He will the rather do it when he sees</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ourselves well sinewed to our defence.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, it is in a manner done already;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For many carriages he hath dispatch’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the sea-side, and put his cause and quarrel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the disposing of the cardinal:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With whom yourself, myself and other lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you think meet, this afternoon will post</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To consummate this business happily.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let it be so: and you, my noble prince,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With other princes that may best be spared,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall wait upon your father’s funeral.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Henry</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>At Worcester must his body be interr’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For so he will’d it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thither shall it then:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And happily may your sweet self put on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lineal state and glory of the land!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whom with all submission, on my knee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do bequeath my faithful services</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And true subjection everlastingly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And the like tender of our love we make,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To rest without a spot for evermore.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Henry</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have a kind soul that would give you thanks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And knows not how to do it but with tears.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, let us pay the time but needful woe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since it hath been beforehand with our griefs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This England never did, nor never shall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when it first did help to wound itself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now these her princes are come home again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come the three corners of the world in arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we shall shock them. Nought shall make us rue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If England to itself do rest but true. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
