<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The French King’s pavilion.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">ARTHUR</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">SALISBURY</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Gone to be married! gone to swear a peace!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>False blood to false blood join’d! gone to be friends!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall Lewis have Blanch, and Blanch those provinces?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is not so; thou hast misspoke, misheard:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be well advised, tell o’er thy tale again:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It cannot be; thou dost but say ’tis so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I trust I may not trust thee; for thy word</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is but the vain breath of a common man:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Believe me, I do not believe thee, man;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have a king’s oath to the contrary.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt be punish’d for thus frighting me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I am sick and capable of fears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oppress’d with wrongs and therefore full of fears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A widow, husbandless, subject to fears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A woman, naturally born to fears;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And though thou now confess thou didst but jest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With my vex’d spirits I cannot take a truce,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But they will quake and tremble all this day.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why dost thou look so sadly on my son?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What means that hand upon that breast of thine?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a proud river peering o’er his bounds?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then speak again; not all thy former tale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But this one word, whether thy tale be true.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SALISBURY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As true as I believe you think them false</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That give you cause to prove my saying true.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, if thou teach me to believe this sorrow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Teach thou this sorrow how to make me die,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let belief and life encounter so</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As doth the fury of two desperate men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which in the very meeting fall and die.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lewis marry Blanch! O boy, then where art thou?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>France friend with England, what becomes of me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fellow, be gone: I cannot brook thy sight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This news hath made thee a most ugly man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SALISBURY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What other harm have I, good lady, done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But spoke the harm that is by others done?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Which harm within itself so heinous is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As it makes harmful all that speak of it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ARTHUR</td>
							<td>I do beseech you, madam, be content.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If thou, that bid’st me be content, wert grim,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ugly and slanderous to thy mother’s womb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Patch’d with foul moles and eye-offending marks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not care, I then would be content,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For then I should not love thee, no, nor thou</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Become thy great birth nor deserve a crown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nature and Fortune join’d to make thee great:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Nature’s gifts thou mayst with lilies boast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with the half-blown rose. But Fortune, O,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She is corrupted, changed and won from thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She adulterates hourly with thine uncle John,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with her golden hand hath pluck’d on France</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tread down fair respect of sovereignty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And made his majesty the bawd to theirs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>France is a bawd to Fortune and King John,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell me, thou fellow, is not France forsworn?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Envenom him with words, or get thee gone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And leave those woes alone which I alone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am bound to under-bear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SALISBURY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pardon me, madam,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I may not go without you to the kings.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou mayst, thou shalt; I will not go with thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will instruct my sorrows to be proud;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For grief is proud and makes his owner stoop.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To me and to the state of my great grief</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let kings assemble; for my grief’s so great</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That no supporter but the huge firm earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can hold it up: here I and sorrows sit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here is my throne, bid kings come bow to it. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Seats herself on the ground.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILLIP</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BLANCH</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN ELINOR</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">AUSTRIA</b>, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis true, fair daughter; and this blessed day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ever in France shall be kept festival:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To solemnize this day the glorious sun</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stays in his course and plays the alchemist,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turning with splendor of his precious eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The yearly course that brings this day about</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall never see it but a holiday.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A wicked day, and not a holy day! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>What hath this day deserved? what hath it done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it in golden letters should be set</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Among the high tides in the calendar?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, rather turn this day out of the week,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day of shame, oppression, perjury.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, if it must stand still, let wives with child</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pray that their burthens may not fall this day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest that their hopes prodigiously be cross’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But on this day let seamen fear no wreck;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No bargains break that are not this day made:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day, all things begun come to ill end,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, faith itself to hollow falsehood change!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By heaven, lady, you shall have no cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To curse the fair proceedings of this day:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I not pawn’d to you my majesty?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You have beguiled me with a counterfeit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Resembling majesty, which, being touch’d and tried,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proves valueless: you are forsworn, forsworn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You came in arms to spill mine enemies’ blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now in arms you strengthen it with yours:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The grappling vigour and rough frown of war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is cold in amity and painted peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And our oppression hath made up this league.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjured kings!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A widow cries; be husband to me, heavens!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let not the hours of this ungodly day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wear out the day in peace; but, ere sunset,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set armed discord ’twixt these perjured kings!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear me, O, hear me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AUSTRIA</td>
							<td>Lady Constance, peace!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>War! war! no peace! peace is to me a war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Lymoges! O Austria! thou dost shame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That bloody spoil: thou slave, thou wretch, thou coward!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou little valiant, great in villany!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou ever strong upon the stronger side!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou Fortune’s champion that dost never fight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when her humorous ladyship is by</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To teach thee safety! thou art perjured too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And soothest up greatness. What a fool art thou,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A ramping fool, to brag and stamp and swear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon my party! Thou cold-blooded slave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon thy stars, thy fortune and thy strength,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dost thou now fall over to my fores?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou wear a lion’s hide! doff it for shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hang a calf’s-skin on those recreant limbs.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AUSTRIA</td>
							<td>O, that a man should speak those words to me!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</td>
							<td>And hang a calf’s-skin on those recreant limbs.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AUSTRIA</td>
							<td>Thou darest not say so, villain, for thy life.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</td>
							<td>And hang a calf’s-skin on those recreant limbs.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td>We like not this; thou dost forget thyself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td>Here comes the holy legate of the pope.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To thee, King John, my holy errand is.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I Pandulph, of fair Milan cardinal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from Pope Innocent the legate here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do in his name religiously demand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why thou against the church, our holy mother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So wilfully dost spurn; and force perforce</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep Stephen Langton, chosen archbishop</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Canterbury, from that holy see?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This, in our foresaid holy father’s name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What earthy name to interrogatories</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can task the free breath of a sacred king?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou canst not, cardinal, devise a name</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So slight, unworthy and ridiculous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To charge me to an answer, as the pope.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell him this tale; and from the mouth of England</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Add thus much more, that no Italian priest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall tithe or toll in our dominions;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But as we, under heaven, are supreme head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So under Him that great supremacy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where we do reign, we will alone uphold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without the assistance of a mortal hand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So tell the pope, all reverence set apart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him and his usurp’d authority.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td>Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Though you and all the kings of Christendom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are led so grossly by this meddling priest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dreading the curse that money may buy out;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by the merit of vile gold, dross, dust,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Purchase corrupted pardon of a man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who in that sale sells pardon from himself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though you and all the rest so grossly led</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet I alone, alone do me oppose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the pope and count his friends my foes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, by the lawful power that I have,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt stand cursed and excommunicate.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And blessed shall he be that doth revolt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From his allegiance to an heretic;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And meritorious shall that hand be call’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Canonized and worshipped as a saint,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That takes away by any secret course</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy hateful life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, lawful let it be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I have room with Rome to curse awhile!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good father cardinal, cry thou amen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To my keen curses; for without my wrong</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td>There’s law and warrant, lady, for my curse.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And for mine too: when law can do no right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let it be lawful that law bar no wrong:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Law cannot give my child his kingdom here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he that holds his kingdom holds the law;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, since law itself is perfect wrong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How can the law forbid my tongue to curse?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Philip of France, on peril of a curse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let go the hand of that arch-heretic;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And raise the power of France upon his head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless he do submit himself to Rome.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN ELINOR</td>
							<td>Look’st thou pale, France? do not let go thy hand.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Look to that, devil; lest that France repent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by disjoining hands, hell lose a soul.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AUSTRIA</td>
							<td>King Philip, listen to the cardinal.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</td>
							<td>And hang a calf’s-skin on his recreant limbs.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AUSTRIA</td>
							<td>Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs, Because⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</td>
							<td>Your breeches best may carry them.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td>Philip, what say’st thou to the cardinal?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td>What should he say, but as the cardinal?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bethink you, father; for the difference</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or the light loss of England for a friend:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forego the easier.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BLANCH</td>
							<td>That’s the curse of Rome.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Lewis, stand fast! the devil tempts thee here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In likeness of a new untrimmed bride.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BLANCH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But from her need.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, if thou grant my need,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which only lives but by the death of faith,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That need must needs infer this principle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That faith would live again by death of need.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O then, tread down my need, and faith mounts up;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td>The king is moved, and answers not to this.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td>O, be removed from him, and answer well!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AUSTRIA</td>
							<td>Do so, King Philip; hang no more in doubt.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</td>
							<td>Hang nothing but a calf’s-skin, most sweet lout.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td>I am perplex’d, and know not what to say.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What canst thou say but will perplex thee more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou stand excommunicate and cursed?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good reverend father, make my person yours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell me how you would bestow yourself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This royal hand and mine are newly knit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the conjunction of our inward souls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Married in league, coupled and linked together</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all religious strength of sacred vows;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The latest breath that gave the sound of words</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Between our kingdoms and our royal selves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And even before this truce, but new before,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No longer than we well could wash our hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To clap this royal bargain up of peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heaven knows, they were besmear’d and over-stain’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With slaughter’s pencil, where revenge did paint</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fearful difference of incensed kings:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shall these hands, so lately purged of blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So newly join’d in love, so strong in both,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Play fast and loose with faith? so jest with heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make such unconstant children of ourselves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As now again to snatch our palm from palm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unswear faith sworn, and on the marriage-bed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of smiling peace to march a bloody host,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make a riot on the gentle brow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of true sincerity? O, holy sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My reverend father, let it not be so!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some gentle order; and then we shall be blest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do your pleasure and continue friends.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All form is formless, order orderless,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save what is opposite to England’s love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore to arms! be champion of our church,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or let the church, our mother, breathe her curse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A mother’s curse, on her revolting son.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A chafed lion by the mortal paw,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A fasting tiger safer by the tooth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td>I may disjoin my hand, but not my faith.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So makest thou faith an enemy to faith;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And like a civil war set’st oath to oath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy tongue against thy tongue. O, let thy vow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First made to heaven, first be to heaven perform’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is, to be the champion of our church!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What since thou sworest is sworn against thyself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And may not be performed by thyself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that which thou hast sworn to do amiss</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not amiss when it is truly done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And being not done, where doing tends to ill,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The truth is then most done not doing it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The better act of purposes mistook</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is to mistake again; though indirect,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet indirection thereby grows direct,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And falsehood falsehood cures, as fire cools fire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within the scorched veins of one new-burn’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is religion that doth make vows kept;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou hast sworn against religion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By what thou swear’st against the thing thou swear’st,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And makest an oath the surety for thy truth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against an oath: the truth thou art unsure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To swear, swears only not to be forsworn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Else what a mockery should it be to swear!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou dost swear only to be forsworn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And most forsworn, to keep what thou dost swear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore thy later vows against thy first</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is in thyself rebellion to thyself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And better conquest never canst thou make</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against these giddy loose suggestions:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon which better part our prayers come in,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The peril of our curses light on thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in despair die under their black weight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">AUSTRIA</td>
							<td>Rebellion, flat rebellion!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Will’t not be?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will not a calfs-skin stop that mouth of thine?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td>Father, to arms!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BLANCH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Upon thy wedding-day?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the blood that thou hast married?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, shall our feast be kept with slaughter’d men?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clamours of hell, be measures to our pomp?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O husband, hear me! ay, alack, how new</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is husband in my mouth! even for that name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which till this time my tongue did ne’er pronounce,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon my knee I beg, go not to arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against mine uncle.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, upon my knee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forethought by heaven!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BLANCH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now shall I see thy love: what motive may</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be stronger with thee than the name of wife?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That which upholdeth him that thee upholds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His honour: O, thine honour, Lewis, thine honour!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I muse your majesty doth seem so cold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When such profound respects do pull you on.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td>I will denounce a curse upon his head.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td>Thou shalt not need. England, I will fall from thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td>O fair return of banish’d majesty!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN ELINOR</td>
							<td>O foul revolt of French inconstancy!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td>France, thou shalt rue this hour within this hour.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is it as he will? well then, France shall rue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BLANCH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The sun’s o’ercast with blood: fair day, adieu!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is the side that I must go withal?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am with both: each army hath a hand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in their rage, I having hold of both,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They swirl asunder and dismember me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Husband, I cannot pray that thou mayst win;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Uncle, I needs must pray that thou mayst lose;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Father, I may not wish the fortune thine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grandam, I will not wish thy fortunes thrive:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whoever wins, on that side shall I lose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Assured loss before the match be play’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td>Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BLANCH</td>
							<td>There where my fortune lives, there my life dies.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Cousin, go draw our puissance together. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>France, I am burn’d up with inflaming wrath;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A rage whose heat hath this condition,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That nothing can allay, nothing but blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The blood, and dearest-valued blood, of France.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thy rage sham burn thee up, and thou shalt turn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ashes, ere our blood shall quench that fire:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look to thyself, thou art in jeopardy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td>No more than he that threats. To arms let’s hie! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same. Plains near Angiers.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarums, excursions. Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">AUSTRIA’S</b> head.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, by my life, this day grows wondrous hot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some airy devil hovers in the sky</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pours down mischief. Austria’s head lie there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While Philip breathes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">ARTHUR</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">HUBERT</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hubert, keep this boy. Philip, make up:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mother is assailed in our tent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ta’en, I fear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, I rescued her;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her highness is in safety, fear you not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But on, my liege; for very little pains</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will bring this labour to an happy end. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarums, excursions, retreat. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN ELINOR</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">ARTHUR</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">HUBERT</b>, and Lords.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN ELINOR</b>.</i> So shall it be; your grace shall stay behind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So strongly guarded. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">ARTHUR</b>.</i> Cousin, look not sad:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy grandam loves thee; and thy uncle will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As dear be to thee as thy father was.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ARTHUR</td>
							<td>O, this will make my mother die with grief!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</b>.</i> Cousin, away for England!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>haste before:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, ere our coming, see thou shake the bags</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of hoarding abbots; imprisoned angels</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set at liberty: the fat ribs of peace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must by the hungry now be fed upon:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Use our commission in his utmost force.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bell, book, and candle shall not drive me back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When gold and silver becks me to come on.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I leave your highness. Grandam, I will pray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever I remember to be holy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For your fair safety; so, I kiss your hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ELINOR</td>
							<td>Farewell, gentle cousin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td>Coz, farewell. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">BASTARD</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN ELINOR</td>
							<td>Come hither, little kinsman; hark, a word.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come hither, Hubert. O my gentle Hubert,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We owe thee much! within this wall of flesh</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is a soul counts thee her creditor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with advantage means to pay thy love:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And my good friend, thy voluntary oath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me thy hand. I had a thing to say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I will fit it with some better time.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By heaven, Hubert, I am almost ashamed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To say what good respect I have of thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HUBERT</td>
							<td>I am much bounden to your majesty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou shalt have; and creep time ne’er so slow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet it shall come from me to do thee good.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I had a thing to say, but let it go:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Attended with the pleasures of the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is all too wanton and too full of gawds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give me audience: if the midnight bell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did, with his iron tongue and brazen mouth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sound on into the drowsy race of night;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If this same were a churchyard where we stand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or if that surly spirit, melancholy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had baked thy blood and made it heavy-thick,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which else runs tickling up and down the veins,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Making that idiot, laughter, keep men’s eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And strain their cheeks to idle merriment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A passion hateful to my purposes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear me without thine ears, and make reply</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without a tongue, using conceit alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without eyes, ears and harmful sound of words;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, in despite of brooded watchful day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, ah, I will not! yet I love thee well;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, by my troth, I think thou lovest me well.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HUBERT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So well, that what you bid me undertake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though that my death were adjunct to my act,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By heaven, I would do it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do not I know thou wouldst?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert, throw thine eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On yon young boy: I’ll tell thee what, my friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is a very serpent in my way;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And whereso’er this foot of mine doth tread,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He lies before me: dost thou understand me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art his keeper.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HUBERT</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And I’ll keep him so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he shall not offend your majesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td>Death.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HUBERT</td>
							<td>My lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td>A grave.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">HUBERT</td>
							<td>He shall not live.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Enough.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I could be merry now. Hubert, I love thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well, I’ll not say what I intend for thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remember. Madam, fare you well:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll send those powers o’er to your majesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ELINOR</td>
							<td>My blessing go with thee!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING JOHN</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For England, cousin, go:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hubert shall be your man, attend on you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all true duty. On toward Calais, ho! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP’S</b> tent.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</b>, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So, by a roaring tempest on the flood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A whole armado of convicted sail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is scatter’d and disjoin’d from fellowship.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td>Courage and comfort! all shall yet go well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What can go well, when we have run so ill?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arthur ta’en prisoner? divers dear friends slain?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bloody England into England gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O’erbearing interruption, spite of France?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What he hath won, that hath he fortified:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So hot a speed with such advice disposed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such temperate order in so fierce a cause,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth want example: who hath read or heard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of any kindred action like to this?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well could I bear that England had this praise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So we could find some pattern of our shame.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Look, who comes here! a grave unto a soul;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Holding the eternal spirit against her will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the vile prison of afflicted breath.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I prithee, lady, go away with me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td>Lo, now I now see the issue of your peace.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td>Patience, good lady! comfort, gentle Constance!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, I defy all counsel, all redress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that which ends all counsel, true redress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Death, death; O amiable lovely death!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou odouriferous stench! sound rottenness!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hate and terror to prosperity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will kiss thy detestable bones</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ring these fingers with thy household worms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And be a carrion monster like thyself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smilest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And buss thee as thy wife. Misery’s love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, come to me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td>O fair affliction, peace!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, no, I will not, having breath to cry:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, that my tongue were in the thunder’s mouth!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then with a passion would I shake the world;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which cannot hear a lady’s feeble voice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which scorns a modern invocation.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td>Lady, you utter madness, and not sorrow.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou art not holy to belie me so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not mad: this hair I tear is mine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My name is Constance; I was Geffrey’s wife;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not mad: I would to heaven I were!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For then, ’tis like I should forget myself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, if I could, what grief should I forget!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Preach some philosophy to make me mad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou shalt be canonized, cardinal;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For being not mad but sensible of grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My reasonable part produces reason</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How I may be deliver’d of these woes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And teaches me to kill or hang myself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I were mad, I should forget my son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or madly think a babe of clouts were he:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not mad; too well, too well I feel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The different plague of each calamity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bind up those tresses. O, what love I note</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the fair multitude of those her hairs!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where but by chance a silver drop hath fallen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even to that drop ten thousand wiry friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do glue themselves in sociable grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like true, inseparable, faithful loves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sticking together in calamity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td>To England, if you will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td>Bind up your hairs.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, that I will; and wherefore will I do it?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I tore them from their bonds and cried aloud</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“O that these hands could so redeem my son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As they have given these hairs their liberty!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now I envy at their liberty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will again commit them to their bonds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because my poor child is a prisoner.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, father cardinal, I have heard you say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we shall see and know our friends in heaven:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If that be true, I shall see my boy again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For since the birth of Cain, the first male child,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him that did but yesterday suspire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There was not such a gracious creature born.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now will canker-sorrow eat my bud</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And chase the native beauty from his cheek</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he will look as hollow as a ghost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As dim and meagre as an ague’s fit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so he’ll die; and, rising so again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I shall meet him in the court of heaven</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I shall not know him: therefore never, never</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td>You hold too heinous a respect of grief.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td>He talks to me that never had a son.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td>You are as fond of grief as of your child.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CONSTANCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Grief fills the room up of my absent child,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remembers me of all his gracious parts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, have I reason to be fond of grief?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fare you well: had you such a loss as I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I could give better comfort than you do.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not keep this form upon my head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When there is such disorder in my wit.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Lord! my boy, my Arthur, my fair son!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My life, my joy, my food, my all the world!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My widow-comfort, and my sorrows’ cure! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING PHILIP</td>
							<td>I fear some outrage, and I’ll follow her. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There’s nothing in this world can make me joy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bitter shame hath spoil’d the sweet world’s taste</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it yields nought but shame and bitterness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Before the curing of a strong disease,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in the instant of repair and health,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fit is strongest; evils that take leave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On their departure most of all show evil:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What have you lost by losing of this day?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td>All days of glory, joy and happiness.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If you had won it, certainly you had.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, no; when Fortune means to men most good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She looks upon them with a threatening eye.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis strange to think how much King John hath lost</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this which he accounts so clearly won:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td>As heartily as he is glad he hath him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your mind is all as youthful as your blood.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For even the breath of what I mean to speak</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of the path which shall directly lead</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy foot to England’s throne; and therefore mark.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>John hath seized Arthur; and it cannot be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, whiles warm life plays in that infant’s veins,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The misplaced John should entertain an hour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A sceptre snatch’d with an unruly hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must be as boisterously maintain’d as gain’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he that stands upon a slippery place</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That John may stand, then Arthur needs must fall;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So be it, for it cannot be but so.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td>But what shall I gain by young Arthur’s fall?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May then make all the claim that Arthur did.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td>And lose it, life and all, as Arthur did.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How green you are and fresh in this old world!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>John lays you plots; the times conspire with you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he that steeps his safety in true blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall find but bloody safety and untrue.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This act so evilly born shall cool the hearts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all his people and freeze up their zeal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That none so small advantage shall step forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cheque his reign, but they will cherish it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No natural exhalation in the sky,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No scope of nature, no distemper’d day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No common wind, no customed event,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But they will pluck away his natural cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And call them meteors, prodigies and signs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Abortives, presages and tongues of heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>May be he will not touch young Arthur’s life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But hold himself safe in his prisonment.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL PANDULPH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, sir, when he shall hear of your approach,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If that young Arthur be not gone already,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even at that news he dies; and then the hearts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all his people shall revolt from him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And kiss the lips of unacquainted change</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of the bloody fingers’ ends of John.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methinks I see this hurly all on foot:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, O, what better matter breeds for you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than I have named! The bastard Faulconbridge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is now in England, ransacking the church,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Offending charity: if but a dozen French</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were there in arms, they would be as a call</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To train ten thousand English to their side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or as a little snow, tumbled about,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Anon becomes a mountain. O noble Dauphin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go with me to the king: ’tis wonderful</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What may be wrought out of their discontent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now that their souls are topful of offence.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For England go: I will whet on the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LEWIS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Strong reasons make strong actions: let us go:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you say ay, the king will not say no. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
